# Relationship Model

## What are attributes?

- Attributes are properties of an entity.
- Attributes are also called fields or columns.
- Attributes can be of different types. For example, integer, float, string, date, bool etc.
- Example : Student Database can have attributes
  - Roll Number : Integer
  - Name : String
  - Date of Birth : Date
  - Passport Number : String (Optional)
  - Aadhar Number : String
  - Department : String

## What is a Schema?

- Schema is a collection of attributes. It is also called as a table.
- It is represented mathematically as a relation.
- The current values (realtion instance) of a relation are specified by a set of tuples / rows.
- An element $t$ of $r$ is a tuple represented by a row in a table.
- **Relations are unordered with no duplicates**

## What is a Key?

- Let $K \subseteq R$, where $R$ is set of attributes in the relation.
- $K$ is the superkey of $R$ if $K$ uniquely identifies each tuple in $R$.
  - Example : Roll Number is a superkey for Student Database.
- Superkey $K$ is a candidate key if $K$ is minimal.
  - Example : Roll Number is a candidate key for Student Database.
- Candidate key $K$ is a primary key if $K$ is chosen to be the primary key.
- Surrogate key (or synthetic key) in a database is a unique identifier for either an entity in the modeled world or an object in the database.
  - The surrogate key is not derived from application data. It is strictly artificial unlike a natural (or business) key which is derived from application data.
  - Example : Roll Number is a surrogate key for Student Database.

### Example : Student Database

- Superkey : Roll Number, Name, Date of Birth
- Candidate Key : Roll Number, Roll Number
- Primary Key : Roll Number
  - Why Roll Number and not Aadhar Number?
    - We can store information in the roll number. For example, the first digit can be the department, the second digit can be the year of joining, the third digit can be the section, the fourth digit can be the batch, the fifth digit can be the student number in the batch. This is not possible with Aadhar Number.
    - Example : 21CS10001 $\rightarrow$ 21 - CS - 1 - 1 - 0001 $\rightarrow$ year - branch - section - batch - student number in batch

### Foreign Key

- A foreign key is a column or group of columns in a relational database table that provides a link between data in two tables. It acts as a cross-reference between tables because it references the primary key of another table, thereby establishing a link between them.

## Relational Operations

### Basic Properties

- A relation is a set of tuples. Hence, all set operations are applicable on relations.
- Ordering of tuples is not important. Hence, all set operations are applicable on relations.
- Duplicates are not allowed. Hence, all set operations are applicable on relations.

### Basic Operations

- Selection : $\sigma_{\text{condition}}(r)$
  - Example : $\sigma_{\text{Roll Number} = 21CS10001}(\text{Student Database})$
    - This gives the row corresponding to the roll number 21CS10001
- Projection : $\pi_{\text{attributes}}(r)$
  - $\pi_{A, B}(r)$ gives the columns A and B of the relation r.
  - returns a relation with only the specified attributes. removes duplicates.
  - Example : $\pi_{\text{Roll Number, Name}}(\text{Student Database})$
    - This gives the roll number and name of all students.
- Union : $r \cup s$
  - returns a relation with tuples that are in r or s.
- Intersection : $r \cap s$
  - returns a relation with tuples that are in r and s.
- Difference : $r - s$
  - returns a relation with tuples that are in r but not in s.
- Cartesian Product : $r \times s$
  - returns a relation with tuples that are in r and s. The number of tuples in the result is $|r| \times |s|$. The number of attributes in the result is $|r| + |s|$.
  - If $r$ has $n$ attribute with the same name as $s$ then we will have to rename to make the attributes unique.
  - If we take the cartesian product of a relation with itself then we get the relation with all possible pairs of tuples. This is called as self join.
- Join : $r \bowtie s$, Let say $r$ and $s$ are on schemas $R$ and $S$ respectivly.
  - Then the Natural Join of the is a relation on the schema $R \cup S$.
  - If two tables have a common attribute then we can join them on that attribute to get a new table.
- Aggregate Operators
  - $\text{sum}$
  - $\text{avg}$
  - $\text{min}$
  - $\text{max}$
  - These operators can be applied on a column to get the sum, average, minimum, maximum of the column. It will return a single value. It will not return a relation.
