# SQL

## Nester Subqueries

- Subqueries can be nested inside other subqueries to an arbitrary depth, but this is rarely necessary.
- The innermost subquery is evaluated first, then the next innermost, and so on.

### Subqueries in the WHERE clause

#### Example

- FInd the courses offered in the Fall 2009 and in the Spring 2010 semesters (intersect example)

```sql
SELECT distinct course_id
FROM section
WHERE semester = 'Fall' AND year = 2009 AND course_id IN (
    SELECT course_id
    FROM section
    WHERE semester = 'Spring' AND year = 2010
);
```

- Find the total number of distinct students who took a course selection taught by instructor with id 10101

```sql
SELECT count(distinct student_id)
FROM takes
WHERE (course_id, sec_id) IN (
    SELECT (course_id, sec_id)
    FROM section
    WHERE instructor_id = 10101
);
```

###### Above query can be written in a better way, this is just an example of nested subqueries

- Find names of instructors with salary greater than that of some (at least one) instructor in the Biology department

```sql
 SELECT distinct name
 FROM instructor as T, instructor as S
 WHERE T.salary > S.salary AND S.dept_name = 'Biology';
```

- we can also write the above query as:

  - ```sql
    SELECT name
    FROM instructor
    WHERE salary > some (
        SELECT salary
        FROM instructor
        WHERE dept_name = 'Biology'
    );
    ```

### Defination of 'all' clause

- `F <comp> all` is true if and only if `F <comp>` every value in the set of values returned by the subquery.
- Where `<comp>` is any comparison operator.
- `F <comp> all` is equivalent to `not (F <comp> any)`

### Defination of 'exists' clause

- The `exists` clause is true if and only if the subquery returns at least one tuple.
- The `not exists` clause is true if and only if the subquery returns no tuples.
- The `exists` clause is true if `count (*) > 0` and `not exists` is true if `count (*) = 0`

#### Use of 'exists' clause

- Yet another way of specifying the query "Find all courses offered in the Fall 2009 and in the Spring 2010 semesters"

```sql
SELECT distinct course_id
from section as S
WHERE semester = 'Fall' AND year = 2009 AND exists (
    SELECT *
    FROM section as T
    WHERE semester = 'Spring' AND year = 2010 AND S.course_id = T.course_id
);
```

#### Use of 'not exists' clause

- Find all students who have taken all the courses offered in the Biology department

```sql
SELECT distinct student_id
FROM student as S
where not exists ( (
    SELECT course_id
    FROM course
    WHERE dept_name = 'Biology' )
    except (
        SELECT T.course_id
        FROM takes as T
        WHERE T.student_id = S.student_id
    ));
```

- First nested query lists all courses offered in Biology
- Second nested query lists all courses a particular student took

### Subqueries in the FROM clause

- Subqueries can also appear in the FROM clause of a query.
- Find the average instructors' salary of those departments whose average salary is greater than 42000

```sql
SELECT avg_salary, dept_name
FROM (
    SELECT avg(salary) as avg_salary, dept_name
    FROM instructor
    GROUP BY dept_name
) as T
WHERE avg_salary > 42000;
```

### Subqueries in the WITH clause

- The WITH clause allows us to define a temporary relation whose definition is available only to the query in which the WITH clause occurs.
- Find all departments with the maximum budget

```sql
with max_budget(value) as
    (select max(budget) from department)
select department.name
from department, max_budget
where department.budget = max_budget.value;
```

### Scalar Subqueries

- A scalar subquery is a subquery that returns exactly one value.
- List all departmentsalone with the number with the number of instructors in each department

```sql
select dept_name, (select count(*) from instructor where department.dept_name = instructor.dept_name) as num_instructors from department;
```

- Error will be thrown if the subquery returns more than one value.

### Deletion

- Delete all instructors
- ```sql
  delete from instructor;
  ```
- Delete all instructors from the Finance department
- ```sql
  delete from instructor where dept_name = 'Finance';
  ```
- Delete all instructors whose salary is less than the average salary of all instructors
  - ```sql
    delete from instructor where salary < (select avg(salary) from instructor);
    ```
  - As we delete tuples from the instructor relation, the average salary of the remaining instructors will change.
  - To avoid this problem, We compute the average salary of all instructors before we start deleting tuples from the instructor relation.

### Insertion

- Add a new tuple to course
- ```sql
  insert into course values ('CS-437', 'Database Systems', 'Comp. Sci.', 4);
  ```
- Add all instructors to the student relation with tot_cred set to $0$
  - ```sql
    insert into student
    select ID, name, dept_name, 0
      from instructor
    ```

### Update

- Increase the salary of all instructors in the Biology department by 10% and whose salary is above $100,000 by 5%
- ```sql
  update instructor
  set salary = salary * 1.05
  where dept_name = 'Biology' and salary > 100000;
  set salary = salary * 1.1
  where dept_name = 'Biology' and salary <= 100000;
  update instructor
  ```
- The order of the two update statements is important. The wrong order will result in some instructors getting a 10% raise and then a 5% raise on top of that.
- We can also use an else clause to avoid this problem
  - ```sql
    update instructor
    set salary = case
      when dept_name = 'Biology' and salary > 100000 then salary * 1.05
      when dept_name = 'Biology' and salary <= 100000 then salary * 1.1
      else salary
    end;
    ```

## Joined Relations

- Join operations take two relations and return as a result another relation
- A join operation is a Cartesian product which requires that tuples in the two relations match (under some condition).
- It also specifies the attributes that are present in the result of the join
- The join operations are typically used as subquery expressions in the from clause

### Inner Join

- The inner join of two relations R and S, written as R join S, is the set of all combinations of tuples in R and S that are equal on their common attribute names.
- The common attribute names are called the join attributes.

### Outer Join

- The outer join of two relations R and S, written as R outer join S, is the set of all combinations of tuples in R and S that are equal on their common attribute names, plus all tuples in R that do not match any tuple in S, plus all tuples in S that do not match any tuple in R.
- The common attribute names are called the join attributes.
- An extension of the join operation that avoids loss of information
- Computes the join and then adds tuples from one relation that does not match tuples in the other relation to the result of the join
- Uses null values

### Left Outer Join

- The left outer join of two relations R and S, written as R left outer join S, is the set of all combinations of tuples in R and S that are equal on their common attribute names, plus all tuples in R that do not match any tuple in S.

## Views

- In some cases, it is not desirable for all users to see the entire logical model (that is, all the actual relations stored in the database.)
- Consider a person who needs to know an instructors name and department, but not the salary. This person should see a relation described, in SQL, by

```sql
select ID, name, dept-name from instructor
```

- A view provides a mechanism to hide certain data from the view of certain users
- Any relation that is not of the conceptual model but is made visible to a user as a"virtual relation" is called a view.

### View Definition

- A view is defined by a query expression that specifies the content of the view. The query expression can be any valid SQL query expression.

```sql
create view instructor_names as <query_expression>
```

- Here `<query_expression>` is any valid SQL query expression.

#### Example

- A view of instructors withoout their salary

```sql
create view instructor_names as
  select ID, name, dept_name
  from instructor;
```

- Find all instructors in the Biology department

```sql
select name
from faculty
where dept_name = 'Biology';
```

- Create a view of department salary totals

```sql
create view dept_totals (dept_name, total_salary) as
  select dept_name, sum(salary)
  from instructor
  group by dept_name;
```

### View defined by another view

- A view can be defined by another view as wel.

### View Expansion

- A way to define the meaning of views defined in terms of other views
- Let view VI be defined by an expression el that may itself contain uses of view relations
- View expansion of an expression repeats the following replacement step:

```
repeat
  Find any view relation Vi in el
  Replace the view relation Vi by the expression defining Vi
```

- until no more view relations are present in el
- As long as the view definitions are not recursive, this loop will terminate

### View Update

- Add a new tuple to faculty view which we defined earlier

```sql
insert into faculty values (10101, 'Srinivasan', 'Comp. Sci.', 65000);
```

This inserstion must be reflected in the instructor relation as well.

### Materialized Views

- Materializing a view: create a physical table containing all the tuples in the result of the query defining the view
- If relations used in the query are updated, the materialized view result becomes out of date
  - Need to maintain the view, by updating the view whenever the underlying relations are updated

## Transactions

- A transaction is a collection of operations that performs a single logical function in a database application.
- It is a unit of both atomicity and consistency.
- Transactions can be committed or rolled back.
  - Most databases commit a transaction automatically when it is completed.
- Transactions are used to ensure data integrity in database applications.

## Integrity Constraints

- Integrity constraints guard against accidental damage to the database, by ensuring that authorized changes to the database do not result in a loss of data consistency
- A checking account must have a balance greater than Rs. 10,000.00
- A salary of a bank employee must be at least Rs. 250.00 an hour
- A customer must have a (non-null) phone number

### Not Null Constraint and Unique Constraint

- Not Null Constraint: The value of the attribute cannot be null
  - Declare name and budget of department as not null
    - ```sql
      create table department (
        dept_name varchar(20) not null,
        building varchar(15),
        budget numeric(12,2) not null,
        primary key (dept_name)
      );
      ```
- Unique Constraint: The value of the attribute must be unique among all tuples in the relation
- Declare ID of instructor as unique
  - ```sql
    create table instructor (
      ID char(5) unique,
      name varchar(20) not null,
      dept_name varchar(20),
      salary numeric(8,2) check (salary > 29000),
      primary key (ID),
      foreign key (dept_name) references department
    );
    ```
- Declare ID of instructor as unique and not null
- Unique constraint is good for candidate keys

### Check Constraint

- Check Constraint: The value of the attribute must satisfy a specified condition (or be null)
- Ensure that the semester is fall, winter or summer
  - ```sql
    create table section (
      course_id varchar(8),
      sec_id varchar(8),
      semester varchar(6) check (semester in ('Fall', 'Winter', 'Summer')),
      year numeric(4,0) check (year > 1700 and year < 2100),
      building varchar(15),
      room_number varchar(7),
      time_slot_id varchar(4),
      primary key (course_id, sec_id, semester, year),
      foreign key (course_id, sec_id) references section,
      foreign key (building, room_number) references room,
      foreign key (time_slot_id) references time_slot
    );
    ```

#### Referential Integrity

- Ensures that a value that appears in one relation for a given set of attributes also appears for a certain set of attributes in another relation

- Example: If "Biology" is a department name appearing in one of the tuples in the instructor relation, then there exists a tuple in the department relation for "Biology"
- Let A be a set of attributes. Let R and S be two relations that contain attributes A and where A is the primary key of S. A is said to be a foreign key of R if for any values of a appearing in R these values also appear in S

##### Cascading Actions in Referential Integrity

- With cascading, you can define the actions that the Database Engine takes when a user tries to delete or update a key to which existing foreign keys point
- ```sql
  CREATE table course (
    course_id varchar(8) primary key,
    title varchar(50),
    dept_name varchar(20) references department on delete cascade,
  )
  ```
- Alternative actions to cascade: **no action**, **set null**, **set default**

#### Integrity Constraints Violations During Transactions

- ```sql
  create table person (
  ID char(10),
  name char 0),
  mother char(10),
  father char(10),
  primary key ID,
  foreign key father references person,
  foreign key mother references person)
  ```

## SQL Data Types

- date: stores a date (year, month, day)
  - Example date '2008-12-31'
- time: stores a time of day (hour, minute, second)
  - Example time '23:59:59'
- timestamp: stores a date and time of day (year, month, day, hour, minute, second)
  - Example timestamp '2008-12-31 23:59:59'
- interval: stores a period of time
  - Example interval '1' year
  - Example interval '3' month
  - Example interval '2' day
  - Example interval '4' hour
  - Example interval '30' minute
  - Example interval '10' second

### Index creation

- ```sql
  create table student(
    ID varchar(5),
    name varchar 0 not null,
    dept-name varchar(20),
    tot-cred numeric (3,0) default 0,
    primary key (ID)
  )
  ```

### User defined types

- create type construct in SQL cr es user- e • ed type (alias, like typedef in C)
- `create type Dollars as numeric (12,2) final`
- ```sql

  create table department (
    dept_name varchar (20),
    building varchar (15),
    budget Dollars
  );
  ```

### Domain

- create domain construct in SQL-92 creates user-defined domain types
  - `create domain person-name char(20) ot null`
- Types and domains are similar
- Domains can have constraints, such as not null, specified on them

- ```sql
  create domain degree-level varchar(10)
  constralnt degree-level-test
  check (value in ('Bachelors', 'Masters', 'Doctorate'));
  ```
- Domains can be used in create table statements, just like types

### Large-object data types

- Large-object data types are used to store large objects, such as images, audio, and video, in a database table.
- The large-object data types are:
  - BLOB (Binary Large Object)
  - CLOB (Character Large Object)
  - NCLOB (National Character Large Object)
  - BFILE (Binary File)

## Authorization

- Authorization is the process of determining whether a user should be allowed to carry out a certain action.
- Forms of authorization on parts of the database:
  - Read - allows reading, but not modification of data
  - Insert - allows insertion of new data, but not modification of existing data
  - Update - allows modification, but not deletion of data
  - Delete - allows deletion of data
- Forms of authorization to modify the database schema
  - Index - allows creation and deletion of indices
  - Resources - allows creation of new relations
  - Alteration - allows addition or deletion of attributes in a relation
  - Drop - allows deletion of relations

### Privileges

- Privileges are the rights to execute certain SQL statements. Privileges are granted to users and roles.
- select - allows reading, but not modification of data
- insert - allows insertion of new data, but not modification of existing data
- update - allows modification, but not deletion of data
- delete - allows deletion of data
- index - allows creation and deletion of indices
- all privileges - allows all allowed operations on a relation

### Revoking Privileges

- The **revoke** statement is used to revoke privileges from users and roles. The syntax is:
  - ```sql
    revoke <privilege> on <relation> from <user or role>
    ```
- Example: Revoke the select privilege on the instructor relation from the user "joe"
  - ```sql
    revoke select on instructor from joe
    ```
- If the same privilege is granted to a user and revoked from a role, the user will still have the privilege.
- The privileges to grant privileges and to revoke privileges are called **grant option** and **revoke option** respectively.

### Roles

- create role construct in SQL-92 creates a role
  - ```sql
    create role instructor
    ```
- Privileges can be granted to roles, and roles can be granted to users
- ```sql
  grant select on instructor to instructor
  ```
- Chain of roles can be created
  - ```sql
    create role dean
    grant instructor to dean
    grant dean to Satish
    ```
