# Natural Numbers

- Natural numbers are the set of positive integers, starting with 0.
- The set of natural numbers is denoted by $\mathbb{N}$.
- The set of natural numbers is countable.
- We can add, subtract, multiply and divide natural numbers.
- We can also compare natural numbers using the usual comparison operators.

# Integers

- Integers are the set of natural numbers and their additive inverses.
- The set of integers is denoted by $\mathbb{Z}$.
- We can show integers on a number line.
- Sign of an integer is determined by its sign.
- Integers are rational numbers with the denominator of 1.

# Arithmetic Operations

### Multiplication

- Multiplication of opposite sign results in a negative integer.
- Multiplication of same sign results in a positive integer.
- multiplication a number by itself is called squaring.
- Squaring a negative number results in a positive number.
- multiplication of a number by itself twice is called cubing.
- Cubing a negative number results in a negative number.

### Division

- Division is repeated subtraction.
- Example 1: 10/2 = 5
- Example 2: 10/3 = 3 with a remainder of 1
- Example 3: 10%3 = 1 (remainder of 10/3)

### Multiple and Factors

- A multiple of a number is a number that is a multiple of that number.
- If B mod A = 0, then B is a multiple of A.
- Example 1: 4 is a multiple of 2. (2 | 4)
- Example 2: 6 is a multiple of 2. (2 | 6)

---

- A is a factor of B if B mod A = 0.
- Factors are always in pairs.
- Factors of 12 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12.
- {1, 12}, {2, 6}, {3, 4} are all pairs of factors of 12.

### Prime Numbers

- A prime number is a number that is only divisible by 1 and itself.
- 1 is not a prime number.
- 2 is the only even prime number.
- 3 is the first odd prime number.
- Sieve of Eratosthenes is a method to find all prime numbers up to a given number.
- we can decompose a number into its prime factors.
- Example 1: 12 = 2 x 2 x 3 or $2^2$ x 3
