# Zeroes of a Polynomial Function

- Given a polynomial function, we can find the zeroes of the function by setting the function equal to zero and solving for x.
- Given a polynomial we can use the method in which we use the x-intercepts to find the zeroes of the function.
- For Quadratic Functions, we can use the quadratic formula to find the zeroes of the function.
- But for higher degree polynomials like cubic, quartic, etc. we it is not very simple to find the zeroes of the function.
- The polynomials can be factored using these known methods:
  - Greatest Common Factor
  - Factoring by Grouping
  - Trinomial Factoring
  - Trial and Error
- We can also use computers and tools like **DESMOS** to find the zeroes of the function.

## X-Intercepts of a Polynomial Function by Factoring

- Set $f(x) = 0$
- If the polynomial function is not given in the factored form:
  - Factor out any common monomial factors from the polynomial function.
  - Factor any factorable binomials or trinomials.
- Set factor to zero and solve to find the x-intercepts.

### Example

- $f(x) = x^6 - 8x^4 + 16x^2$
  - Setting $f(x) = 0$
  - $x^6 - 8x^4 + 16x^2 = 0$
  - $x^2(x^4 - 8x^2 + 16) = 0$
  - $x^2(x^2 - 4)^2 = 0$
  - Factors of $x^2(x^2 - 4)^2 = 0$ are $x = 0$ and $(x^2 - 4) = 0$
  - $x^2 - 4$ can be factored as $(x - 2)(x + 2)$
  - Therefore, the zeroes of the function are $x = 0$ and $x = \pm 2$
- $f(x) = x^3-4x^2-3x+12$
  - Setting $f(x) = 0$
  - $x^3-4x^2-3x+12 = 0$
  - $x^2(x-4)-3(x-4) = 0$
  - $(x^2-3)(x-4) = 0$
  - $(x-\sqrt{3})(x+\sqrt{3})(x-4)=0$
  - Therefore, the zeroes of the function are $x = \pm \sqrt{3}$ and $x = 4$
- Find the Y-Intercept and X-Intercept of $g(x)=(x-1)^2(x+3)$
  - $x = 1, -3$ are the X-Intercepts of $g(x)$
  - For Y-Intercept, we need to find the value of $g(x)$ when $x = 0$
  - $g(0) = (0-1)^2(0+3) = 0$
  - Therefore, the Y-Intercept is $3$
