# Finding the Multiplicities of the Roots of a Polynomial

- Finding the X-Intercepts of a Polynomial which cannot be factored. However, we can find the multiplicities of the roots of a polynomial by using the graph of the polynomial.
- We can start by solving the polynomial for different values and hope that we come accross a value that is a root of the polynomial.
- For Example $f(x) = x^3+4x^2+x-6$
  - This polynomial cannot be factored by normal methods.
    - It has no common monomial factors.
    - It cannot be factored by grouping.
  - We can find the roots by plotting it on a graph
    - | x   | y   |
      | --- | --- |
      | -3  | 0   |
      | -2  | 0   |
      | -1  | -4  |
      | 0   | -6  |
      | 1   | 0   |
      | 2   | 20  |
    - Here we can see that $x=-2,1$ are roots of the polynomial.
- Graphs behave differently at various X-Intercepts.
  - Sometimes, the graph will just cross over the horizontal axis at an intercept.
  - Other times, the graph will cross over the horizontal axis and then "bounce" back up.
  - If the degree of the polynomial is even it will **"bounce"** off the horizontal axis.
    - For higher even degree polynomials, the graph will "bounce" more than once. It will "bounce" off with higher and higher amplitude. and the graph will look flatter and flatter.
  - If the degree of the polynomial is odd it will **cross over** the horizontal axis.
    - For higher odd degree polynomials, the graph will cross over quickly. and the graph will look flatter and flatter.
