# What is Machine Learning ?
- Machine Learning is the study of computer algorithms that improve automatically through experience. It is seen as a subset of artificial intelligence. Machine learning algorithms build a mathematical model based on sample data, known as "training data", in order to make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed to perform the task.
### What is a Task ?
- A task is a specific objective for your algorithms. It could be predicting a stock price, classifying the sentiment of a tweet, or identifying a face in an image.
### Why and When Machine Learning ?
- Programming / Human Failures are the main reasons for Machine Learning to be used.
- Machine Learning is used when the problem is too complex for traditional approaches or there is no known algorithm for the problem.
- Machine Learning also used to accelerate the process of solving a problem. Or asisted by a human to solve a problem.
#### Example : Face Recognition
- It is a very tedious task for humans to manually select all the faces in a picture.
- It is also very difficult to write a program to detect faces in a picture, because there are many variations of faces. With many different expressions, angles, lighting, makeup, accessories, etc.
- Machine Learning can be used to train a model to detect faces in a picture. The model can be trained with many different pictures of faces. The model will learn to detect faces in a picture. It can do this with a very high accuracy.
#### Example : Weather Prediction
- Humans cannot predict the weather accurately. It is a very complex problem and there are many factors that affect the weather.
- A normal program cannot be written to predict the weather. Because there are many factors that affect the weather. It is very difficult to write a program to take all these factors into account.
- A Machine Learning model can be trained with many different weather data. The model will learn to predict the weather. It can do this with decent accuracy.