# What is Data?
- Data is a collection of facts, such as numbers, words, measurements, observations or even just descriptions of things.
- Data can be qualitative or quantitative.
- Data can be structured or unstructured.

# What is a Model?
- A model is a simplified representation of reality. It is a simplified version of something complex. It is a description or analogy used to help visualize something that cannot be directly observed.
- A model is a representation of a system that allows for investigation of the properties of the system and, in some cases, prediction of future outcomes.
- Some example of Models:
  - The Ieal Gas model
    - Inverse square law for gravitational attraction
    - Moore's Law for semiconductors
    - Cobb—Douglas model in Economics
### Types of Models
- Predictive Models
  - Predictive models are used to predict the value of a variable based on the value of another variable.
  - Example : Predicting the price of a house based on the size of the house.
    - Linear Regression Model
    - Classification Model
- Probabilistic Models
  - Probabilistic models are used to predict the probability of an event based on the value of another variable.
  - Example : Predicting the probability of a person having cancer based on the age of the person.
  - Probabilistic models scores probabilities.
#### Learning Algorithms
- Learning algorithms are algorithms that turn data into models.
- Learning algorithms are used to train models.
- Models are trained with data.
- More data means better models. More data means better predictions. More data means better decisions.