# Supervised Learning
### Regression
- Supervised Learning is a type of Machine Learning algorithm that learns a function that maps an input to an output based on example input-output pairs. It infers a function from labeled training data consisting of a set of training examples.
- Supervised Learning is also called as Predictive Learning.
- Supervised Learning is used to predict the output of a new input based on the training data.
- It is also called "**Curve Fitting**" or "**Function Approximation**".
- Algrotihm ouputs a model $f : \mathbb{R}^d \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ that maps input to output.
  - $$Loss = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n (f(x_i) - y_i)^2$$
  - $$f(x) = \sum_{i=1}^d w_i x_i + b$$
### Classification
- Classification is a type of Supervised Learning algorithm that learns a function that maps an input to a discrete output based on example input-output pairs. It infers a function from labeled training data consisting of a set of training examples.
- Classification is used to predict the class of a new input based on the training data.
- It is also called "**Pattern Recognition**".
- Algorithm Outputs a model $f : \mathbb{R}^d \rightarrow \{-1,1\}$ that maps input to output.
  - $$Loss = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n 1({f(x_i) \neq y_i})$$
  - $$f(x) = \text{sign}(w^Tx + b)$$

### Evaluated Learning Models
- Learning data uses $(x_i, y_i)$ pairs.
- But evaluationthe learned model must not me done on the training data itself.
- Use test data that is **not** in the training data for model evaluation.
- Evaluating model on training data itself will result in **overfitting**, it will predict an over optimistic outcome.
- **Overfitting** is the production of an analysis that corresponds too closely or exactly to a particular set of data, and may therefore fail to fit additional data or predict future observations reliably.
### Model Selection: Validation Data
- Learning algorithms just find the "best" model from a set of models.
- How to find the right collection of model?
  - This is called model selection, and it is done by using another subset of data called validation data that is distinct from train