# What is a software architecture pattern?
- "A general, reusable solution to a commonly occurring problem within a given context in software design."
- Experienced design practitioners have developed a set of recurring solutions to common problems in software design.
- These solutions are called software architecture patterns.
- Software architecture patterns are similar to software design patterns but have a broader scope.
## Patterns
### Model View Controller (MVC)
- The Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern separates the modeling of the domain, the presentation, and the actions based on user input into three separate classes.
- The model manages fundamental behaviors and data of the application. It can respond to requests for information, respond to instructions to change the state of its information, and even to notify observers in event-driven systems when information changes. This could be a database, or any number of data structures or storage systems. In short, it is the data and data-management of the application.
- Model
  - Core data can be stored in a database
  -  Databases are designed to store, retrieve, and manage large amounts of data easily
- Views:
  - User side of the application
  - Interfaces for the user to interact with the application
- Controller
  - The controller is the link between the user and the system
  - "Business logic" of the application
### Some other patterns
- Model View Presenter (MVP)
- Model View ViewModel (MVVM)
- Hierarchical Model View Controller (HMVC)

