# Information Reprensation in a machine

- Computers can only understand binary.
  - Binary is a base 2 number system.
  - Binary has only two digits : 0 and 1.
  - Computers understand binary because they are made of transistors. which can be either on or off/ high or low voltage. which can be represented as 1 or 0.
  - Binary is the simplest number system.
- Numbers in binary
  - Place Value: Binary numbers eg. 6 = 0110
  - Two's complement: Negative numbers eg. -6 = 1010
- Characters in binary
  - ASCII: American Standard Code for Information Interchange
    - 7 bits for characters (128 characters)
    - It contains characters from `a-z, A-Z, 0-9`, and some special characters `(!, @, #, $, %, ^, &, *, (, ), -, _, +, =, {, }, [, ], |, \, :, ;, ", ', <, >, ,, ., ?, /)`
    - Extended ASCII: 8 bits for characters (256 characters)
      - Includes characters from other languages like French, German, Spanish, etc.
  - Unicode: Universal Character Set
    - Allows codes from other languages to be represented in binary.
    - UCS-2: 2 bytes for characters ($65536$ characters)
    - UCS-4: 4 bytes for characters ($4294967296$ [4 billion+] characters)
  - UTF-8: Unicode Transformation Format

# Efficiency of Encoding

- Efficiency of encoding is the ratio of the number of bits required to encode a message to the number of bits required to encode the message in binary.
- Most commonly used languages on the internet?
- Example:
  - Text document with 1000 words, approxirnately 5000 characters - (including spaces)
  - UCS-4 encoding: 32b x 5000 = 160,000 bits
  - ASCII encoding: 8b x SOOO = 40,000 bits
  - Original 7-bit ASCII sufficient för English: 7b x 5000 = 35,000 bits
  - Minitnutn needed to encode just 'a' - 'z', nutnbers and sorne special characters: could fit in 6 bits: 30,000 bits
  - Optional coding based on frequency of occurrence:
    - 'e' is tnost cotntnon letter, 't', 'a', 'o', ...
    - Huffman or similar encoding: - 10-20,000 bits, possibly less
- How would you encode a message?

  - Encoding them by frequency of occurrence is bad because it depends on the message.
  - Prefix codes are good because they are independent of the message.

- | 1st byte | 2nd Byte | 4th byte | Free Bits | Maximum Expressible Unicode Value |
  | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------- | --------------------------------- |
  | 0xxxxxxx |          |          | 7         | 127                               |
  | 110xxxxx | 10xxxxxx |          | 11        | 2,047                             |
  | 1110xxxx | 10xxxxxx | 10xxxxxx | 16        | 65,535                            |
  | 11110xxx | 10xxxxxx | 10xxxxxx | 21        | 1,114,111                         |

### UTF-8

- UTF-8 is a variable length encoding.
  - Most commonly used encoding on the internet.
  - All ascii documents are automatically UTF-8 documents.
- All other characters can be encoded basd on prefix string
- Most difficult to decode for text processing
  - first check prefix
  - linked list of available prefixes
  - decode character based on prefix
  - move to next character and repeat
