# Markup

- Markup is a way to add formatting to text. It is used in many places on the internet, including this document. It is also used in word processors like Microsoft Word and Google Docs. It is also used in many other places, like in the source code of this website.

### Types of Markup

- Coombs et al, "Communication Systems and the Future of Scholarly Text Processing", Communications of ACM, 1987
- Presentaional Markup
  - What you see is what you get (WYSIWYG) editors.
  - Embed codes not part of regular text, specific to the application.
- Procedural Markup
  - Embed codes are part of the text.
  - The codes are interpreted by the application.
  - The codes are not visible in the final document.
- Descriptive Markup
  - This is the most common type of markup.
  - We use tags to describe the text.
    - Tags are not part of the text.
    - `<b>bold</b>` is an example of a tag.
    - `<text>` is an example of a tag.

#### Examples of Markup

- MS Word, Google Docs, etc.
  - Presentational Markup
  - WYSIWYG editors
  - Embed codes not part of regular text, specific to the application.
- HTML, LaTeX, etc.
  - Procedural Markup
  - Embed codes are part of the text.
  - The codes are interpreted by the application.
  - The codes are not visible in the final document.

### Semantic Markup

- Semantic markup is a type of markup that describes the meaning of the text. There is a difference between semantic markup and descriptive markup. Descriptive markup describes the text, but it does not describe the meaning of the text. Semantic markup describes the meaning of the text. Semantic markup is used in HTML, LaTeX, etc. Descriptive markup is used in MS Word, Google Docs, etc.
-
