# Styling

- Styling is a very important part of any application. It is the first thing that the user sees and it is the first thing that the user interacts with. It is important to make sure that the styling is consistent throughout the application. This is where themes come in. Themes are a way to make
- Themes
- Style Sheets
- CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) is a style sheet language used for describing the presentation of a document written in a markup language such as HTML. CSS is a cornerstone technology of the World Wide Web, alongside HTML and JavaScript.

### CSS Syntax

- Internal CSS

  - Internal CSS is defined within the `<style>` element, inside the `<head>` section of an HTML page:
  - Example:

  ```html
  <!DOCTYPE html>
  <html>
    <head>
      <style>
        body {
          background-color: linen;
        }

        h1 {
          color: maroon;
          margin-left: 40px;
        }
      </style>
    </head>
    <body>
      <h1>This is a heading</h1>
      <p>This is a paragraph.</p>
    </body>
  </html>
  ```

- External CSS
  - External stylesheets are stored in CSS files. External style sheets enable you to change the appearance and layout of all the pages in a Web site, just by editing one single file!
  - We can link the external CSS file using the <link> tag. The <link> tag goes inside the <head> section.
  - It goes in the head section of the HTML document because we want to load the CSS file before the HTML file is loaded and rendered or else the HTML file will be rendered first and then the CSS file will be loaded and the styles will be applied to the HTML file. This will cause the HTML file to be rendered twice which is not good for performance and it will also cause the HTML file to be rendered without any styles for a short period of time.

### Responsive Design

- There are a wide range of devcies with a wide range of screen sizes and resolution and it is important to make sure that the application looks good on all of them. This is where responsive design comes in. Responsive design is the process of making sure that the application looks good on all devices.

### Frameworks and Libraries

#### Bootstrap

- Commonly used CSS framework
  - Bootstrap is a free and open-source CSS framework directed at responsive, mobile-first front-end web development. It contains CSS- and JavaScript-based design templates for typography, forms, buttons, navigation, and other interface components.
- It has standard CSS styles for all the HTML elements and it also has a grid system that makes it easy to create responsive layouts.
  - Buttons
  - Forms
  - Grid System
  - Navbar
  - Icons
- It has a Mobile First approach which means that the application is designed for mobile devices first and then it is scaled up to desktop devices.
