# Model View Controller (MVC)

## Overview of MVC

- The Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern separates the modeling of the domain, the presentation, and the actions based on user input into three separate classes.
- The model represents the domain-specific information (data) and the business rules that govern access to and updates of this data.
- The view renders the model into a form suitable for interaction, typically a user interface element.
- The controller receives user input and initiates a response by making calls on model objects.
- MVC originated in the Smalltalk-80 (1979) became popular with the advent of NeXTSTEP (late 1980s) and is now a standard pattern used in many object-oriented development environments.

## View

- The view manages the display of information. A view is a (visual) representation of its model. It would ordinarily highlight certain attributes of the model and suppress others. It is thus acting as a presentation filter.
- A view is attached to its model (or model part) and gets the data necessary for the presentation from the model by asking questions. It may also update the model by sending appropriate messages. All these questions and messages have to be in the terminology of the model, the view will therefore have to know the semantics of the attributes of the model it represents.
- User interaction, however, is typically not forwarded to the model directly, but to the controller instead.
  - Types of User Interactions with the View
    - Selection of a menu item
    - Clicking on a button
    - Scrolling a list
    - Typing text into a text field
    - etc.

#### User Interaction

- The user interaction is determined by the hardware and software components that are available to the user. The user interaction is typically not forwarded to the model directly, but to the controller instead.
- Different target devices have different user interaction capabilities. For example, a desktop computer has a keyboard and a mouse, whereas a mobile device has a touch screen and a mobile phone has a keypad.
- User-Agent is useful to know the capabilities of the device that is accessing the web application.

### Types of Views

- Fully Static View - The view is completely static, i.e. it is determined at compile time and does not change at runtime.
- Partially Dynamic View - The view is partially dynamic, i.e. it is determined at compile time, but some parts of the view are determined at runtime.
- Mostly Dynamic View - The view is mostly dynamic, i.e. it is determined at runtime, but some parts of the view are determined at compile time. This is the case for most web applications. The view is determined at runtime by the controller and the model.

### Ouput Formats

- The view can be rendered in different formats, e.g. HTML, PDF, XML, etc. The view is typically rendered in HTML for web applications.
- HTML - The most commonly used format for rendering web pages.
- Dynamic Images - The view can also be rendered as dynamic images, e.g. charts, graphs, etc.
- JSON/XML - The view can also be rendered as JSON or XML for web services. This is typically the case for RESTful web services.

### User Interface Design

- Design for interaction with the user is a very important aspect of the view. The user interface design is typically done by a user interface designer.
- Goals of User Interface Design
  - The user interface should be easy to learn.
  - The user interface should be efficient to use.
  - The user interface should be pleasant to use.
  - The user interface should be effective to use.
  - The user interface should be simple and consistent.
- Aesthetics is an important aspect of user interface design. Aesthetics is the study of sensory or sensori-emotional values, sometimes called judgments of sentiment and taste. Aesthetics is the study of the mind and emotions in relation to the sense of beauty. Aesthetics is the study of the principles and rules of art. Aesthetics is the study of the principles of beauty, especially in art.
- Accessibility is an important aspect of user interface design. Accessibility is the degree to which a product, device, service, or environment is available to as many people as possible. Accessibility can be viewed as the "ability to access" and benefit from some system or entity.
  - Accessibility often goes against the goal of aesthetics. For example, a website that is designed for accessibility may not be aesthetically pleasing.

## Symanetics Process

- Functionality Requirements - The functionality requirements are determined by the user interaction. The user interaction is determined by the hardware and software components that are available to the user.
  - User Interaction - The user interaction is determined by the hardware and software components that are available to the user.
    - Hardware Components - The hardware components include the keyboard, mouse, touch screen, etc.
    - Software Components - The software components include the operating system, web browser, etc.
- User and Task Analysis - The user and task analysis is done by a user interface designer. The user and task analysis is used to determine the functionality requirements.
- Prototyping - The prototyping is done by a user interface designer. The prototyping is used to determine the functionality requirements. The prototyping is also used to determine the aesthetics requirements.
- Testing - The testing is done by a user interface designer. The testing is used to determine the functionality requirements. The testing is also used to determine the aesthetics requirements.