# Request - Response
- The request-response model is a communication pattern where a client sends a request to the server and the server responds to that request.
- Basic request is a client clicking on a link or entering a URL into a browser. The browser then sends a request to the server, which sends back a response.
- The request-response model is a simple, but powerful abstraction for designing distributed systems.
### Constraints
- Any "page" can be requested at any time, and the server will respond with the appropriate HTML.
- The server does not need to keep track of the state of the client.
## CRUD
- Create-Read-Update-Delete (CRUD) is a set of operations that we get servers to perform on our behalf.
- It is a lifecycle of data in a database.
- Databases can be optimized for different types of operations, and the CRUD operations are a way to categorize these optimizations.
  - For example, a database might be optimized for fast reads, but slow writes.
  - Another database might be optimized for fast writes, but slow reads.
### Create
- Create a new resource, such as a new user account.
- This is typically done via an HTTP POST request.
- We check within the database to see if the user already exists, and if not, we create a new user.
### Read
- Read a resource, one or more records from the database.
- Summarize the data in a report, or show a list of records.
- This is typically done via an HTTP GET request.
### Update
- Update a resource, such as a user account.
- Update a record in the database. This is typically done via an HTTP PUT or PATCH request.
- We check within the database to see if the user exists, and if so, we update the user.
### Delete
- Delete a resource, such as a user account.
- Delete a record from the database, delete a file or a wrong entry in a table.
- This is typically done via an HTTP DELETE request.
## API - Application Programming Interface
- An API is a set of functions and procedures that allow the creation of applications which access the features or data of an operating system, application, or other service.
- An API is a set of clearly defined methods of communication between various software components.
- CRUD operations are a common set of operations that APIs implement.
  - Usually considered as a first level of API maturity.
## Actions
- Actions are the only way to change the state of the store.
- CRUD is a set of action
  - Other actions include:
    - Login
    - Logout
    - Send email
    - etc.
- We group actions into Controllers
- Interactions to the actions is done through the HTTP Requests
- HTTP Verbs used to convey the action
### Rules of Thumb
- Should be possible to change views without the model ever knowing
- Should be possible to change underlying storage of model without views every knowing
- Controllers / Actions should generally NEVER talk to a database directly
#### In Practice
- Views and controllers tend to be more closely coupled than models and controllers
  - This is because views and controllers are often created together and are often changed together as well.