# Determinants

### [Video Link](https://youtu.be/A3fxp49I4U8)

## Definition

- Every square matrix A has an associated number, called its determinant and denoted by det(A) or Al. It is used in
  - Solving systems of linear equations
  - Finding the inverse of a matrix
  - Calculus and More

## Calculating Determinants

### Determinant of a 1 x 1 matrix :

- $det(A) = a_{11}$

### Determinant of a 2 x 2 matrix :

- $A = \begin{bmatrix}
      a & b \\
      c & d \\
      \end{bmatrix}$
- $det(A) = ad - bc$

### Determinant of a 3 x 3 matrix :

- $A = \begin{bmatrix}
      a_{11} & a_{12} & a_{13} \\
      a_{21} & a_{22} & a_{23} \\
      a_{31} & a_{32} & a_{33} \\
      \end{bmatrix}$
- We will the get the determinant by using the first row.
- $det(A) = a_{11} \begin{vmatrix}
      a_{22} & a_{23} \\
      a_{32} & a_{33} \\
      \end{vmatrix} - a_{12} \begin{vmatrix}
      a_{21} & a_{23} \\
      a_{31} & a_{33} \\
      \end{vmatrix} + a_{13} \begin{vmatrix}
      a_{21} & a_{22} \\
      a_{31} & a_{32} \\
      \end{vmatrix}$
- $det(A) = a_{11} (a_{22}a_{33} - a_{23}a_{32}) - a_{12} (a_{21}a_{33} - a_{23}a_{31}) + a_{13} (a_{21}a_{32} - a_{22}a_{31})$

## Example

- $A = \begin{bmatrix}
      2 & 4 & 1 \\
      3 & 8 & 7 \\
      5 & 6 & 9 \\
      \end{bmatrix}$
- $det(A) = 2 \begin{vmatrix}
      8 & 7 \\
      6 & 9 \\
      \end{vmatrix} - 4 \begin{vmatrix}
      3 & 7 \\
      5 & 9 \\
      \end{vmatrix} + 1 \begin{vmatrix}
      3 & 8 \\
      5 & 6 \\
      \end{vmatrix}$

- $det(A) = 2 (8 \times 9 - 7 \times 6) - 4 (3 \times 9 - 7 \times 5) + 1 (3 \times 6 - 8 \times 5)$
- $det(A) = 2 (72 - 42) - 4 (27 - 35) + 1 (18 - 40)$
- $det(A) = 2 (30) - 4 (-8) + 1 (-22)$
- $det(A) = 60 - (-32) + 22$
- $det(A) = 94$

## Determant of Identity Matrix

### Determinant of a 1 x 1 identity matrix :

- $det(I) = 1$

### Determinant of a 2 x 2 identity matrix :

- $det(I) = 1 \times 1 - 0 \times 0 = 1$

### Determinant of a 3 x 3 identity matrix :

- $det(I) = 1 \times 1 \times 1 - 0 \times 0 \times 0 = 1$

## Determinant of a product of matrices

- $det(AB) = det(A) \times det(B)$

## Determinant of a inverse of a matrix

- $det(A^{-1}) = \frac{1}{det(A)}$

### Properties:

- Switching Rows
  - $det(\ A{\tilde{}} \ ) = -det(A)$
- Switching Columns
  - $det(\ A{\tilde{} \not ={}\tilde{}} \ ) = -det(A)$
- Adding multiples of rows
  - $A = \begin{bmatrix}
        a & b \\
        c & d \\
        \end{bmatrix}$
  - $A{\tilde{}} = \begin{bmatrix}
        a + tc & b + td \\
        c  & d  \\
        \end{bmatrix}$
  - $det(A{\tilde{}}) = (a + tc)(d) - (b + td)(c)$
  - $= ad + tcd - bc - tcd$
  - $= ad - bc$
  - $= det(A)$
- **Same for columns as well**
- Scalar multiplication of $A$ row $B$ a constant $t$.
- $det(A{\tilde{}}) = t \cdot det(A)$

## Minors

- Minor of a matrix is the determinant of a submatrix obtained by deleting a row and a column from the matrix.
- Minors are denoted by $M_{ij}$.

### Example

- $A = \begin{bmatrix}
      a_{11} & a_{12} & a_{13} \\
      a_{21} & a_{22} & a_{23} \\
      a_{31} & a_{32} & a_{33} \\
      \end{bmatrix}$

- $M_{11} = \begin{vmatrix}
      a_{22} & a_{23} \\
      a_{32} & a_{33} \\
      \end{vmatrix}$

- $M_{11} = a_{22}a_{33} - a_{23}a_{32}$

## Cofactors

- Cofactor of a matrix is the determinant of a submatrix obtained by deleting a row and a column from the matrix.
- Cofactors are used to calculate the inverse of a matrix.

- We can use Minors and Cofactors to calculate the determinant of a matrix.

### Formula

$$\sum_{j=1}^n (-1)^{1+i} \cdot a_{1i} \cdot M_{1j} = \sum_{j=1}^n (-1)^{1+i} \cdot a_{1i} \cdot C_{1j}$$

## Expansion along any row or column

$$det(A) = \sum_{j=1}^n (-1)^{1+i} \cdot a_{ii} \cdot C_{ij} \text{ (i is fixed)}$$
$$\text{or}$$
$$det(A) = \sum_{j=1}^n (-1)^{1+i} \cdot a_{ii} \cdot C_{ij} \text{ (j is fixed)}$$

## Properties

- Determinant of a product of matrices is the product of the determinants of the matrices.

  - $det(AB) = det(A) \times det(B)$
  - $det(A^n) = det(A)^n$
  - $det(A^{-1}) = \frac{1}{det(A)}$
  - $det(P^{-1}AP) = det(A)$
  - $det(AB) = det(BA)$
  - $det(A^T) = det(A)$

- Switching Rows or Columns changes the sign of the determinant.

  - $det(\ A{\tilde{}} \ ) = -det(A)$
  - $det(\ A{\tilde{} \neq\tilde{}} \ ) = -det(A)$

- Adding multiples of rows or columns does not change the determinant.

  - $det(A{\tilde{}}) = det(A)$

- Scalar multiplication of $A$ row $B$ a constant $t$.
  - $det(A{\tilde{}}) = t \cdot det(A)$
  - **Same for columns as well**
  - $det(tA_{n\times n}) = t^n \cdot det(A)$

### Useful tips for calculating determinants

- The determinant of a matrix with a row or column of zeros is $0$.
- The determinant of a matrix in which one row (or column) is a linear combination of other rows (resp. columns) is $0$.
- Scalar multiplication of a row by a constant t multiplies the
  determinant by $t$.
- While computing the determinant, you can choose to compute it using expansion along a suitable row or column.
