# Echelon Form

## Definition

- A matrix is in echelon form if it is in row echelon form and has all leading entries in the first column, second column, and so on.

## Row Echelon Form

- The first non-zero element in each row, called the leading entry, is $1$.
- Each leading entry is in a column to the right of the leading entry in the previous row.
- Rows with zero elements, if any, are below rows having a non-zero element.
- For a non-zero row, the leading entry in the row is the only non-zero entry in the column.
- Suppose for some $i$, $i^{th} row of $A$ is a zero row but $b_i \neq 0$.
  - The system of equations $Ax=b$ has no solution.
  - Reason: This means if we write the corresponding system of linear equations, the $i^{th}$ equation is
    - $0x_1 + 0x_2 + \cdots + 0x_n = b_i$.
    - This solution is not possible.

### Example

- $A_{ref} = \begin{bmatrix}
      1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\
      0 & 0 & 1 & 3 \\
      0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
      \end{bmatrix}$
- $A$ is in row echelon form.
- Converting $A$ to reduced row echelon form:
- $A_{rref} = \begin{bmatrix}
      1 & 2 & 0 & 0 \\
      0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
      0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
      \end{bmatrix}$
- $A$ is in reduced row echelon form.
- Soluting the system of equations:
  - Let $Ax=b$ where $A$ is in the form of $A_{rref}$.
  - Suppose for some $i$, $a_{ii} = 0$.

### Dependency

- Let $Ax=b$ where $A$ is in the form of $A_{rref}$.
- Assume that for every zero row of $A$, $b_i = 0$.
  - If the $i^{th}$ column has the leading entry of some row, we call $x_i$ a **dependent variable**.
  - If the $i^{th}$ column has no leading entry, we call $x_i$ an **independent variable**.

#### Example

- $A = \begin{bmatrix}
      1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\
      0 & 0 & 1 & 3 \\
      0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
      \end{bmatrix}$
- $A$ is in reduced row echelon form.
- In this case, $x_1$, $x_3$ and $x_4$ are dependent variables.
- and $x_2$ is an independent variable.
