# Linear Mappings

## Definition

- A linear mapping $f: V \rightarrow W$ between two vector spaces $V$ and $W$ is said to be a linear transformations if for nay two vectors $v_1$ and $v_2$ in the vector space $V$ and for any $c \in \mathbb{R}$, the following two conditions are satisfied:
  - $f(v_1 + cv_2) = f(v_1) + cf(v_2)$
  - $f(v_1) + f(cv_2) = f(v_1) + cf(v_2)$

## Types of Linear Mappings

### $1-1$ function

- Function $f: V \rightarrow W$ is said to be a $1-1$ function if for any two vectors $v_1$ and $v_2$ in the vector space $V$, if $f(v_1) = f(v_2)$ then $v_1 = v_2$.
- For linear transformation, being a $1-1$ is equivalent to $f(v) = 0$ implies $v = 0$.

### Onto function

- Function $f: V \rightarrow W$ is said to be an onto function if for any vector $w$ in the vector space $W$, there exists a vector $v$ in the vector space $V$ such that $f(v) = w$.

## Isomorphism

- A linear transformation $f: V \rightarrow W$ is said to be an isomorphism if it is both a $1-1$ function and an onto function or $f$ is a bijective function.
- Note that being a bijection is equivalent to: for any $v \in W$, there exists a $v \in V$ such that $f(v) = w$.

### Definition

- A linear transformation $f: V \rightarrow W$ between two vector spaces $V$ and $W$ is said to be an isomorphism if it is a bijection.

### Example

- $f: \mathbb{R}^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^2$ defined by $f(x,y) = (2x,0)$
- There is no pre-image for the vector $(u,v)$, where v is non-zero eg. $(0,1)$ has no pre-image. So $f$ is not surjective. Also $f(x,y) = (0,0)$ implies $x = 0$. But there is no restriction on $y$, eg. $f(0,1) = (0,0)$. Hence $f$ is not $1-1$.

- $f : \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^3 \ ; \ f(t) = (t,3t,\frac{23}{89}t)$ is $1-1$ but not onto.
- $f : \mathbb{R}^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{R} \ ; \ f(x,y) = x$ is onto but not $1-1$.

## Bases determine linear transformations

- Let $V$ be a vector space with basis $\lbrace v_1, v_2, \dots,v_n\rbrace$.
- Let $f : V \rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation. Then the ordered vectors $f(v_1), f(v_2), \dots, f(v_n)$ form a basis for $W$.
  $$f(v) = f(\sum^n_{i=1}c_iv_i) = \sum^n_{i=1}c_if(v_i)$$
  $$\text{ The values are determined by } c_1,\dots,c_n \ \& \ f(v_1), \dots f(v_n).$$

### Example

- Let the standard basis for $\mathbb{R}^2$ be $\lbrace (1,0), (0,1) \rbrace$. What linear transformation $f: \mathbb{R}^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^2$ do we obtain by extending:
  $$ f((1,0)) = (2,0) = 2(1,0)$$
  $$ f((0,1)) = (0,1) = 1(0,1)$$
- $(x,y) = x(1,0) + y(0,1)$
- $f(x,y) = 2x(1,0) + y(0,1) = (2x,y)$
