# Kernal and Image

## Definations

### Kernal

- Let $f : V \rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation.
- The kernal of $f$ or $ker(f):$
  $$ker(f) = \{v \in V | f(v) = 0\}$$

### Image

- The image of $f$ or $im(f) / Im(f):$
  $$im(f) = \{w \in W | \exists v \in V, f(v) = w\}$$
- $Im(f)$ is the other name for the "range of the function $f$" which we have studied in Math-1.
- The image of $f$ is also the subspace for $W$.

#### Examples

- Consider $f : \mathbb{R}^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^2$ defined by $f(x, y) = (2x, y)$.
  - Then the $ker(f) = \lbrace (0,0) \rbrace$
  - $Im(f) = \mathbb{R}^2$
- Consider $f : \mathbb{R}^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^2$ defined by $f(x, y) = (2x, 0)$.
  - Then the $ker(f) = \lbrace (0,y) | y \in \mathbb{R} \rbrace$
  - $Im(f) = \lbrace (x,0) | x \in \mathbb{R} \rbrace$

## The kernal and injectivity of a linear transformation

- Function $f : V \rightarrow W$ is injective if $f(v_1) = f(v_2)$ implies $v_1 = v_2$.
- Linear transformation $f$ being $1-1$ (or injective) is equivalent to $f(v) = 0$ implies $v = 0$.
- Rewriting the last part in terms of $ker(f)$, we see that linear transformation is $1-1$ is equivalent to $ker(f) = \lbrace 0 \rbrace$.
  $$\text{ A linear transformation } f \text{ is injective if and only if } ker(f) = \lbrace 0 \rbrace$$

## The image and surjectivity of a linear transformation

- Function $f : V \rightarrow W$ is surjective if for each $w \in W$, there exists some $v \in V$ such that $f(v) = w$.
- It follows the defination of the function $f : V \rightarrow V$ being onto (or surjective) is equivalent to $Range(f) = W$.

## Kernels and null spaces

- Let $f : V \rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation. Let $\beta = v_1, v_2, \dots, v_n$ and $\gamma = w_1, w_2, \dots, w_m$ be ordered bases for $V$ and $W$ respectively.
- Let $A$ be the corresponding to $f$ with respect to $\beta$ and $\gamma$.
  $$v = \sum_{j=1}^n c_j v_j \in V, f(v)=\sum_{j=1}^nc_j\sum_{i=1}^m A_{ij}w_i$$
- If $f(v) = 0$ for all $v \in V$, then $f$ is called a zero transformation.
- All the coefficients $c_j$ are zero, so $v = 0$.
- Thus $v = ker(f)$.

## Bases for the kernal and image of linear transformation

- Let $A$ be the matrix corresponding to $f$ with respect to $\beta$ and $\gamma$.
- The relation between kernals and null spaces derived earlier actually yields an isomorphism between the null space of $A$ and the kernal of $f$.

## Points
### Properties of linear spaces
- If the linear transformation is from $\mathbb{R}^m \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^n$, where are $m > n$.
  - Then the transformation can never be $1-1$.
  - This is because we there has to be some overlap while mapping a higher dimension to a lower dimension.
- If the linear transformation is from $\mathbb{R}^m \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^n$, where are $m < n$.
  - Then the transformation can never be $\text{onto}$.
  - This is because a smaller dimension cannot fully map to a higher dimension.
- If the linear transformation is from $\mathbb{R}^m \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^n$, where are $m = n$.
  - Then this transformation can be $1-1$ and $\text{onto}$.
  - If the $\ker(f) = 0$ then it can be $1-1$. If the $\ker(f) = 0$ then the $nullity(A) = 0$.
  - According to the **Rank Nullity Theorm** $rk(A) + nullity(A) = n$.
    - $rk(A) + 0 = n$
  - Since the rank of the matrix is $n$ then it is onto.
  - TLDR: A linear transformation can be $1-1$ and $\text{onto}$ if the transformtion is happening in the same dimension and nullity of the transformation is 0 or the rank of the matrix is $n$.
- We can use these properties to find the properties of the transformation.
### Finding the linear transformation
- We can find the linear transformation if we have the basis of the domain and codomain.
  - We can backtrack from codomain to domain. We can find the matrix of the transformation and then find the transformation.