# Affine Subspace

### Defination

- Let $V$ be a vector space. An **affine subspace** of $V$ is a subset $L$ such that there exists $v \in V$ and a vector subspace $U \sube V$ such that
  $$L = v + U := \{ v + u| u \in U\}$$
- An affine subspace $L$ is n-dimensional if the corresponding subspace $U$ is n-dimensional.
- The subspace $U$ corresponding to an affine subspace is unique.
- However the vector $v$ corresponding to an affine subspace is not unique.
- Affine subspaces are thus **_translation_** of vector subspace $V.$

### Solution set of a system of linear equations

- Let $Ax = b$ be a linear system of equations.
  - $b = 0:$ In this case, it is a homogeneous system and as seen
    before, the solution set is a subspace of $\mathbb{R}^n$, namely the null
    space $A$.
  - $b \notin \text{ column space of } A$: In this case, $Ax = b$ does not have a solution, so the solution set is the empty set.
  - $b \in \text{ column space of } A$: In this case, the solution set L is an affine subspace of $\mathbb{R}^n$. Specifically, it can be described as $L =  v + nullspace(A)$ where v is any solution of the equation $Ax = b.$

### Affine mapping of affine subspaces

- Let $L$ and $L'$ be affine subspace of $V$ and $W$ respectively. Let $f : L \rightarrow L'$ be a function. Cosider any vector $v \in L$ and the unique subspace $U \sube V$ such that $L = v + U$.
- Note that $f(v) \in L'$ and hence $f(v) + U'$ where $U'$ is unique subspace of $W$ corresponding to $L'$. Then $f$ is an affine mapping from $L$ to $L'$ if the function $g: U \rightarrow U'$ defined by $g(u) = f(u+v) - f(v)$ is a linear transformation.
- For a linear transformation $T: U \rightarrow U'$, and fixed vectors $v \in L$ and $v' \in L'$, an affine mapping $f$ can be obtained by defining $f(v+u) = v' + T(u)$, and in fact every affine mapping is obtained in this way.

### Example

- Let $T = (2x+3y+2, 4x-5y+3)$. Then this is an affine mapping from $\mathbb{R}^3 \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^2$
- Let $T : V \rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation and $w \in W$, then mapping
  $$T': V \rightarrow W$$
  $$T'(v) = T(v) + w$$
- This is a affine mapping from $V$ to $W$.
- We can find the shift in the mapping by looking at the shift at the $0$ vector
