# What is an Orthonormal Set?

- An orthonormal set of vectors of an inner product space $V$ is an orthogonal set of vectors such that the norm of each vector of the set is $1$.
- Suppose $S \in V$, then $S$ is an orthonormal set if and only if
  $$\|v_i\| = 1 \text{ for all } i \in \{1,2, \dots, k\}$$
  $$<v_i,v_j> = 0 \text{ for all } i,j \in \{1,2, \dots, k\} \text{ and } i \neq j$$

# What is an Orthonormal Basis?

- An **orthonormal basis** is an orthonormal set of vectors which forms a basis.
- Equivalently : An orthonormal basis is an orthogonal basis where the norm of each vector is 1.
- Equivalently : An orthonormal basis is a maximal orthonormal set.
- Example : The standard basis w.r.t. the usual inner product forms an orthonormal basis.

#### Example

- Consider $\mathbb{R}^3$ with the usual inner product. Then the set $S = \{\frac{1}{3}(,2, 2), \frac{1}{3}(-2,-1, -2), \frac{1}{3}(2, -2, 1)\}$ is an orthonormal basis in $\mathbb{R}^3$.

### Obtaining an Orthonormal sets from an Orthogonal sets

- Let V be an inner product space. If $S$ is an orthogonal set of vectors, then we can obtain an orthonormal set of vectors $\beta$ from $S$ by dividing each vector $v_i$ by its norm.
  $$\beta = \{\frac{v_1}{\|v_1\|}, \frac{v_2}{\|v_2\|}, \dots, \frac{v_n}{\|v_n\|}\}$$

#### Example

- Consider $\mathbb{R}^2$ with the usual inner product. Then the set $S = \{(4,3), (-3, 2), (-5, 18)\}$ is an orthogonal set of vectors.
- Then $\beta = \{\frac{1}{\sqrt{10}},(1,3), \frac{1}{\sqrt{10}(-3,1)}\}$ is an orthonormal set of vectors.

### Why Orthonormal Bases are Important?

- Suppose $S$ is an orthonormal basis of an inner product space $V$ and let $v \in V$
- Then $v$ can be written as a linear combination of the vectors in $S$.
  $$v = \sum_{i=1}^n c_i v_i$$
- How do we find the coefficients $c_i$? For any basis, this means writing a system of linear equations and solving it.
- But since $\gamma$ is orthonormal, we can use the inner product and compute the coefficients $c_i$ directly.
  $$c_i = <v, v_i>$$

#### Example

- $\{\frac{1}{\sqrt{10}},(1,3), \frac{1}{\sqrt{10}(-3,1)}$ is an orthonormal basis of $\mathbb{R}^2$. Write $(2,5)$ as a linear combination in terms of these basis vectors.
- $c_1 = <(2,5), \frac{1}{\sqrt{10}(1,3)}>$
  - $c_1 = \frac{1}{\sqrt{10}}(2\cdot 1 + 5\cdot 3) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{10}}(2 + 15) = \frac{17}{\sqrt{10}}$
- $c_2 = <(2,5), \frac{1}{\sqrt{10}(-3,1)}>$
  - $c_2 = \frac{1}{\sqrt{10}}(2\cdot (-3) + 5\cdot 1) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{10}}(-6 + 5) = \frac{-1}{\sqrt{10}}$
