# What is Expected Value of Random Variable?
- The expected value of a random variable is the average value of the random variable over many trials of the experiment.
- The expected value is used to summerize the random variable.
  - How to provide information about a large data set?
    - Minimum value, Maximum value, Median, Mean.
  - Average value of a data is very useful in practice.
    - It repents the center of the data.
    - It is very useful in comparisions in many situations.
  - Probability theory: expected value of random variable is an important theoretical concept and can be used to summerize the random variable.
### Defination (Expected Value of Random Variable)
- Suppose $X$ is a discrete random variable with range $T_X$ and PMF $f_X$. The expected value of $X$, denoted by $E[X]$, is defined by
  $$E[X] = \sum_{t \in T_X} t \cdot f_X(t) = \sum_{t \in T_X} t \cdot P(X=t)$$
assuming above sum exists.
#### Notes
- $E[X]$ is also called the mean of $X$.
- $E[X]$ has the same units as $X$.
- $E[X]$ may or may not be in the range of $X$.

### Expected Value for Uniform Distribution
- $X \sim \text{Uniform}(a,b)$
  - $T_X = \{a, a+1, \dots, b\}$
   $$f_X(t) = \frac{a+b}{2}, t \in T_X$$
### Expected Value for Geometric Distribution
- $X \sim \text{Geometric}(p)$
   $$E[X] = \sum_{t=1}^{\infin} t \cdot (1-p)^{t-1} \cdot p$$

### Expected Value for Poisson Distribution
- $X \sim \text{Poisson}(\lambda)$
   $$E[X] = \sum_{t=0}^{\infin} t \cdot \frac{\lambda^t}{t!} \cdot e^{-\lambda}$$

### Expected Value for Binomial Distribution
- $X \sim \text{Binomial}(n,p)$
   $$E[X] = \sum_{t=0}^{n} t \cdot \binom{n}{t} \cdot p^t \cdot (1-p)^{n-t}$$

### Simplifying Summation
- Difference Equation (DE):
$$\sum_{t=1}^n a_t = \frac{a_1 - r\cdot a_n}{1-r} + \frac{1}{1-r} \cdot \sum_{t=1}^{n-1} b_t$$
- Geometric Progression (GP):
  $$\sum_{t=1}^n a_t = \frac{a_1 - r\cdot a_n}{1-r}$$
- Expoential Function:
$$\sum_{t=0}^\infin e^{-\lambda} \cdot \frac{\lambda^t}{t!} = 1$$
- Binomial Formula:
$$\sum_{t=0}^n \binom{n}{t} \cdot a^k \cdot b^{n-k} = (a+b)^n$$
- Geometric Series:
  - $X \sim \text{Geometric}(p) (DE:a_1, r=1-p, b_t = r^tp)$
  $$E[X] = \sum_{t=1}^{\infin} t \cdot (1-p)^{t-1} \cdot p = \frac{1}{p}$$
- $X \sim \text{Poisson}(\lambda) : E[X] =  \sum_{t=0}^\infin t \cdot e^{-\lambda} \frac{\lambda^t}{t!}$
  - The expected value of a Poisson random variable is $\lambda$.
- $X \sim \text{Binomial}(n,p) : E[X] = \sum_{t=0}^n t \cdot \binom{n}{t} \cdot p^t \cdot (1-p)^{n-t}$
  - The expected value of a binomial random variable is $np$.