# Set Theory

https://youtu.be/8z04uTycZpE

- Set theory is the study of sets.
- A set is a collection of objects.

  - e.g. The set of all integers. $\{ ...\ -2,-1,0,1,2,3,4,5, \ ...\}$
  - e.g. The set of all the days of the week. ${$ Monday $,$ Tuesday $,$ Wednesday $,$ Thursday $,$ Friday $,$ Saturday $,$ Sunday $}$
  - e.g The set of all the factors of 24. ${$ $1$ $,$ $2$ $,$ $3$ $,$ $4$ $,$ $6$ $,$ $8$ $,$ $12$ $,$ $24$ $}$

- Sets can be Infinite.
  - e.g. Sets of different types of numbers. $\mathbb{N}$, $\mathbb{Z}$, $\mathbb{Q}$, $\mathbb{R}$, $\mathbb{C}$
- Sets can have different types of objects.
- Sets are Unordered.
- Duplicate objects are not allowed.

## Cardinality

- Cardinality is the number of elements in a set.
- Cardinality is only defined for finite sets.
- Cardinality is denoted by $\mid$A$\mid$.
  - e.g. $\mid$${$ $-$ $3$ $,$ $-$ $2$ $,$ $-$ $1$ $,$ $0$ $,$ $1$ $,$ $2$ $,$ $3$ $}$ $\mid$ = 7

### Cardinality of Infinite Sets

- Cardinality of infinite sets is denoted by $\aleph$.
- Is $\mathbb{Q}$ bigger than $\mathbb{Z}$?
- Is $\mathbb{R}$ bigger than $\mathbb{Q}$?

## Describing Sets, Membership

- Finite Sets are described using curly braces.
- Infinite Sets cannot be listed out.
- Not every collection of objects is a set.
  - Collections of sets are not sets. This is called **Russell's Paradox**.

### Membership

- We can use the symbol $\in$ to describe membership.
- Membership x $\in$ A means that x is an element of A.
  - 5 $\in$ $\mathbb{Z}$ means that 5 is an element of the set of all integers.
  - $\sqrt{2}$ $\notin$ $\mathbb{Q}$ means that $\sqrt{2}$ is not an element of the set of all rational numbers.

### Subsets

- A subset is a set that is contained within another set.
- X is a subset of Y if every element of X is also an element of Y.
- Notation for subsets is A $\subseteq$ B.
  - e.g. $\mathbb{Z}$ $\subseteq$ $\mathbb{Q}$ means that every element of the set of all integers is also an element of the set of all rational numbers.
  - e.g $Primes$ $\subseteq$ $\mathbb{N}$ means that every prime number is also a natural number.
- All the elements of set of all integers without 0 $\mathbb{Z}$ $\backslash$ $\lbrace$ $0$ $\rbrace$ is a subset of the set of all integers $\mathbb{Z}$.