# Trees

- A trees is a connected graph with no cycles.
- A tree on $n$ vertices has $n-1$ edges.
- A tree will have all the vertices connected.
- We will use these facts about trees to build minimum cost spanning trees.
- Two natural strategies
  - Start with the smallest edge and "Grow" the tree by adding edges.
    - Prim's Algorithm
  - Scan the edges in ascending order of weight to connect components.
    - Kruskal's Algorithm

---

## Prim's Algorithm

- Weighted undirected graph,
  - $G=(V,E), W:E \to \mathbb{R}$
  - $G$ assumed to be connected
- Strategy
  - Incrementally grow the minimum cost spanning tree
  - Start with a smallest weight edge overall
  - Extend the current tree by adding the smallest edge from the tree to a vertex not yet in the tree.

#### Minimum Separator Lemma

- Let $V$ be partitioned into two non-empty sets $U$ and $W=V \  \backslash \ U$.
- Let $e = (u,w)$ be the minimum cost edge with $u \in U$ and $w \in W$.
- Every minimum cost spanning tree of $G$ contains $e$.

## Kruskal's Algorithm

- Weighted undirected graph,$G = (V,E), W:E \to \mathbb{R}$
  - $G$ assumed to be connected
- Find a minimum cost spanning tree of $G$ by
  - Sorting the edges in non-decreasing order of weight
  - Adding edges to the tree in order until all vertices are connected.

#### Minimum Spanning Tree Lemma

- Edges in $TE$ partition vertices into connected components.
- Initially each vertex is a separate component.
- Adding an edge $e = (u,w)$ merges components containing $u$ and $w$.
  - If $u$ and $w$ are in the same componentm $e$ forms a cycle and must be discarded.
