# Rectangular Coordinate System

https://youtu.be/RfG2NLXqGE8

- Horizontal axis is called x-axis
- Vertical axis is called y-axis
- The point where the x-axis and y-axis intersect is called the origin.
- The **top half** of the x-axis is called the positive y-axis.
- The **bottom half** of the x-axis is called the negative y-axis.
- The **right half** of the y-axis is called the positive x-axis.
- The **left half** of the y-axis is called the negative x-axis.
- The X-Axis and Y-Axis intersect at the origin.
- Any point on the plane can be represented by a pair of numbers. The first number is the x-coordinate and the second number is the y-coordinate. **(x, y)**
- E.g. The point (3, 4) is 3 units to the right of the origin and 4 units above the origin.

## Quadrants

- The plane is divided into 4 quadrants by the origin.
- The Quadrants are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4.
- The Quadrants are numbered in a counter-clockwise fashion.
- The first quadrant is the quadrant above and to the right of the origin. (Positive x-axis and positive y-axis)
- The second quadrant is the quadrant above and to the left of the origin. (Negative x-axis and positive y-axis)
- The third quadrant is the quadrant below and to the left of the origin. (Negative x-axis and negative y-axis)
- The fourth quadrant is the quadrant below and to the right of the origin. (Positive x-axis and negative y-axis)
---
- The Point lies in the x-axis if the y-coordinate is 0.
- The Point lies in the y-axis if the x-coordinate is 0.