# Quadratic Functions

- A quadratic function is a function of the form $f(x) = ax^2 + bx + c$, where $a,b,c$ are real numbers and $a \ne 0$.
- $ax^2$ is the term of degree 2 also called the **_Quadratic Term_**, $bx$ is the term of degree 1 also called the **_Linear Term_** and $c$ is the **_Constant Term_**.
- The Graph of a quadratic function is a parabola.
- To graph a quardratic function, plot the ordered pairs on the coordinate plane that satisfy the function.

## Parabola

- All Parabolas have a axis of symmetry, which is a vertical line that divides the parabola into two congruent halves.
- The point at which the axis of symmetry intersects the parabola is called the **_Vertex_**.
- The y-intercept of the quadratic function is **$c$**.
- The y-intercept $y = a(0)^2 + b(0) + c = c$
- The equation of the axis of symmetry is $x = -\frac{b}{2a}$
- If the $a$ of the quadratic function is positive, the parabola opens up. else if the $a$ is negative, the parabola opens down.

### Example

- Graph the quadratic function $f(x) = x^2 + 8x + 9$
  - y-intercept: $y = 0^2 + 8(0) + 9 = 9$
  - The axis of symmetry is $x = -\frac{8}{2(1)} = -4$
  - Coordinate of the vertex is $4^2 + 8(-4) + 9 = 16 - 32 + 9 = -7$
  - $(-4, -7)$
- Graph a quadratic function $f(x) = -x^2 + 1$
  - y-intercept: $y = 0^2 + 0 + 1 = 1$
  - Axis of symmetry: $x = -\frac{0}{2(-1)} = 0$
  - Vertex: $0^2 + 0(-0) + 1 = 1$
  - $(0, 1)$

## Maximum and Minimum Values

- The maximum value of a quadratic function is the value of the function at the vertex.
- If the $a$ of the quadratic function is positive, the maximum value is at the vertex. else if the $a$ is negative, the minimum value is at the vertex.
- The range of the quadratic function is the set of all y-values of the function.
- If the $a$ of the quadratic function is positive then $\mathbb{R} \subset \{ \ f(x)|f(x)\geqslant f_{min}\ \}$
- If the $a$ of the quadratic function is negative then $\mathbb{R} \subset \{ \ f(x)|f(x)\leqslant f_{max}\ \}$
